8 Ways to Lose Belly Fat and Live a Healthier Life

Maintaining a trim midsection does more than make you look great—it can help you live longer. Larger waistlines are linked to a higher risk of heart disease, diabetes and even cancer. Losing weight, especially belly fat, also improves blood vessel functioning and also improves sleep quality.


It’s impossible to target belly fat specifically when you diet. But losing weight overall will help shrink your waistline; more importantly, it will help reduce the dangerous layer of visceral fat, a type of fat within the abdominal cavity that you can’t see but that heightens health risks, says Kerry Stewart, Ed.D. , director of Clinical and Research Physiology at Johns Hopkins.

Here’s how to whittle down where it matters most.


 1. Try curbing carbs instead of fats.

    When Johns Hopkins researchers compared the effects on the heart of losing weight through a low-carbohydrate diet versus a low-fat diet for six months—each containing the same amount of calories—those on a low-carb diet lost an average of 10 pounds more than those on a low-fat diet—28.9 pounds versus 18.7 pounds. An extra benefit of the low-carb diet is that it produced a higher quality of weight loss, Stewart says. With weight loss, fat is reduced, but there is also often a loss of lean tissue (muscle), which is not desirable. On both diets, there was a loss of about 2 to 3 pounds of good lean tissue along with the fat, which means that the fat loss percentage was much higher on the low-carb diet.


 2. Think eating plan, not diet.

    Ultimately, you need to pick a healthy eating plan you can stick to, Stewart says. The benefit of a low-carb approach is that it simply involves learning better food choices—no calorie-counting is necessary. In general, a low-carb way of eating shifts your intake away from problem foods—those high in carbs and sugar and without much fiber, like bread, bagels and sodas—and toward high-fiber or high-protein choices, like vegetables, beans and healthy meats.


 3. Keep moving.

    Physical activity helps burn abdominal fat. “One of the biggest benefits of exercise is that you get a lot of bang for your buck on body composition,” Stewart says. Exercise seems to work off belly fat in particular because it reduces circulating levels of insulin —which would otherwise signal the body to hang on to fat—and causes the liver to use up fatty acids, especially those nearby visceral fat deposits, he says.

    The amount of exercise you need for weight loss depends on your goals. For most people, this can mean 30 to 60 minutes of moderate to vigorous exercise nearly every day.


 4. Lift weights.

    Adding even moderate strength training to aerobic exercise helps build lean muscle mass, which causes you to burn more calories throughout the entire day, both at rest and during exercise.


 5. Become a label reader.

    Compare and contrast brands. Some yogurts, for example, boast that they’re low in fat, but they’re higher in carbs and added sugars than others, Stewart says. Foods like gravy, mayonnaise, sauces and salad dressings often contain high amounts of fat and lots of calories.


 6. Move away from processed foods.

    The ingredients in packaged goods and snack foods are often heavy on trans fats, added sugar and added salt or sodium—three things that make it difficult to lose weight.


 7. Focus on the way your clothes fit more than reading a scale.

    As you add muscle mass and lose fat, the reading on your bathroom scale may not change much, but your pants will be looser. That’s a better mark of progress. Measured around, your waistline should be less than 35 inches if you’re a woman or less than 40 inches if you’re a man to reduce heart and diabetes risks.


 8. Hang out with health-focused friends.

    Research shows that you’re more apt to eat better and exercise more if your friends and family are doing the same.


Definitions

Insulin (in-suh-lin): A hormone made by the cells in your pancreas. Insulin helps your body store the glucose (sugar) from your meals. If you have diabetes and your pancreas is unable to make enough of this hormone, you may be prescribed medicines to help your liver make more or make your muscles more sensitive to the available insulin. If these medicines are not enough, you may be prescribed insulin shots.

Blood vessels (veh-suls): The system of flexible tubes—arteries, capillaries and veins—that carries blood through the body. Oxygen and nutrients are delivered by arteries to tiny, thin-walled capillaries that feed them to cells and pick up waste material, including carbon dioxide. Capillaries pass the waste to veins, which take the blood back to the heart and lungs, where carbon dioxide is let out through your breath as you exhale.

Arteries (are-te-rease): The blood vessels that carry oxygen-rich blood away from your heart for delivery to every part of your body. Arteries look like thin tubes or hoses. The walls are made of a tough outer layer, a middle layer of muscle and a smooth inner wall that helps blood flow easily. The muscle layer expands and contracts to help blood move.


Research Shows Losing Weight Leads to Heart Health

A diet that’s low in fat and carbohydrates can improve artery function, according to a 2012 study by Johns Hopkins researchers. After six months, those on the low-carb diet had lost more weight, and at a faster pace. But in both groups, when weight was lost—and especially when belly fat shrank—the arteries were able to expand better, allowing blood to travel more freely. The study shows that you don’t have to cut out all dietary fat to shrink belly fat. For heart health, simply losing weight and exercising seems to be key.

Weight loss: 6 strategies for success

This content does not have an English version.
This content does not have an Arabic version.

Appointments at Mayo Clinic

Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.

Request Appointment
Healthy Lifestyle


Weight loss

Print

Products and services


Weight loss: 6 strategies for success

Follow these proven ways to lose weight and boost your health.

By Mayo Clinic Staff


Hundreds of fad diets, weight-loss programs and outright scams promise quick and easy weight loss. But the best way to lose weight and keep it off is to make lasting lifestyle changes. These healthy changes include eating a balanced diet and moving more each day.

Here are six tips to help you start your weight-loss journey.


1. Make sure you're ready


Long-term weight loss takes time and effort. So be sure that you're ready to eat healthy foods and become more active. Ask yourself the following questions:

 * Do I have a strong desire to change habits to help me lose weight?
 * Am I too distracted by other pressures?
 * Do I use food to cope with stress?
 * Am I ready to learn new ways to cope with stress?
 * Do I need other support — either from friends or healthcare professionals — to manage stress?
 * Am I willing to change my eating habits?
 * Am I willing to change my physical activity and exercise habits?
 * Can I spend the time it takes to make these changes?


Talk with your healthcare professional if you need help taking charge of stress. Lowering stress can help you make long-term healthy lifestyle changes.


2. Find your inner drive


No one else can make you lose weight. You need to make diet and physical activity changes to help yourself. What will give you the burning desire to stick to your weight-loss plan?

Make a list of reasons why weight loss is important to you. The list can help you stay inspired and focused. Maybe you want to boost your health or get in shape for a vacation. Think of your goals on days when you don't feel like eating healthy foods or moving more. Find other ways to stay on track too. For instance, you could post an uplifting note to yourself on the refrigerator or the pantry door.


It's up to you to make the changes that lead to long-term weight loss. But it helps to have support from others. Pick people who will inspire you. They should never shame you or get in the way of your progress.

It's best to find people who will:

 * Listen to your concerns and feelings.
 * Share your goal to lead a healthy lifestyle.
 * Do active hobbies with you or help you make healthy menus.

Your support group can help you stick to your healthy changes.

If you prefer to keep your weight-loss efforts private, take some steps to stay on course. Track your diet and exercise in a journal or an app. Also track your weight. Review your progress and make changes as needed.


3. Set goals you can reach


Aim to lose 1 to 2 pounds (0.5 to 1 kilogram) a week over the long term. To do that, you'll need to burn about 500 to 750 calories more than you take in each day.

Losing 5% of your current weight may be a good goal to start with. If you weigh 180 pounds (82 kilograms), that's 9 pounds (4 kilograms). Even this amount of weight loss can lower your risk of some long-term health conditions. Those conditions include heart disease and type 2 diabetes.


It can help to set two types of goals. The first type is called an action goal. You can list a healthy action that you'll use to lose weight. For instance, "Walk every day for 30 minutes" is an action goal. The second type is called an outcome goal. You can list a healthy outcome that you aim to have. "Lose 10 pounds (4.5 kilograms)" is an example of an outcome goal. An outcome goal is what you want to achieve. But it doesn't tell you how to get there. An action goal does. You set action goals so that you can make healthy changes.


4. Enjoy healthy foods


To lose weight, you need to lower the total calories you take in from food and drinks. But your meals can still be tasty and simple to make.

One way that you can take in fewer calories is to eat more fruits, vegetables and whole grains. These are known as plant-based foods. They're low in calories and high in fiber. Fiber helps you feel full. You can eat many kinds of plant-based foods to help you reach your goals.


Follow these other diet tips too:

 * Eat at least four servings of vegetables and three servings of fruits a day. Snack on fruits and veggies if you get hungry between meals.
 * Have whole grains, such as brown rice, barley, and whole-wheat bread and pasta. Eat fewer refined grains, such as white rice and white bread.
 * Use healthy fats, such as olive oil, vegetable oils, avocados, nuts, nut butters and nut oils. But keep in mind that even healthy fats are high in calories.
 * Limit foods and drinks that have added sugar. These include desserts, jellies and sodas. The natural sugar in fruit is OK.
 * Choose low-fat or fat-free dairy products.
 * Focus on eating fresh foods. They have more nutrition than processed foods. Processed foods often come in a box or a can. And they tend to have more fat, sugar or salt.

It's a good idea to be mindful while you eat. Focus on each bite of food. This helps you enjoy the taste. It also makes you more aware of when you feel full. Try to not to watch TV or stare at your phone during meals. You may eat too much without knowing it.


5. Get active, stay active


You can lose weight without exercise, but it's harder to do. Regular physical activity helps burn off extra calories.

Exercise has many other benefits. It can lift your mood, lower blood pressure and help you sleep better. Exercise helps you keep off the weight that you lose too. Studies show that people who maintain their weight loss over the long term get regular physical activity.


How many calories you burn depends on how often, how long and how hard you exercise. One of the best ways to lose body fat is through steady aerobic exercise, such as brisk walking. Work up to at least 30 minutes of aerobic exercise most days of the week. Some people may need more exercise than this to lose weight and keep it off.

Also aim to do strength training exercises at least twice a week. You could lift weights, use exercise bands or do pushups.

Any extra movement helps you burn calories. So think about ways to move more during the day. You could:

 * Use the stairs instead of an elevator.
 * Park at the far end of the lot when you shop.
 * Stand instead of sit while you talk on the phone or check email.
 * Walk laps around the room or march in place while you watch TV.


6. Change your mindset


It's not enough to eat healthy foods and exercise for just a few weeks or months. To keep off extra weight, you should make these healthy changes a way of life. Lifestyle changes start with taking an honest look at your eating patterns and daily routine.

Think about negative habits or other challenges that have kept you from losing weight in the past. Then plan for how you'll deal with them going forward.


You'll likely have some setbacks on your weight-loss journey. But don't give up after a setback. Simply start fresh the next day. Remember that you're planning to change your life. It won't happen all at once. Stick to your healthy lifestyle. The results will be well worth it.




There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.


From Mayo Clinic to your inbox

Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.

Email
Address 1

ErrorEmail field is required

ErrorInclude a valid email address

Learn more about Mayo Clinic’s use of data.

To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.

Subscribe!


Thank you for subscribing!


You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.


Sorry something went wrong with your subscription

Please, try again in a couple of minutes

Retry


 * Share
 * Tweet

June 22, 2024
Show references
 1. Hensrud DD, ed. The Mayo Clinic Diet. 3rd ed. Mayo Clinic Press; 2023.
 2. Duyff RL. Reach and maintain your healthy weight. In: Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics Complete Food and Nutrition Guide. 5th ed. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt; 2017.
 3. Losing weight. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. https://www.cdc.gov/healthyweight/losing_weight/index.html. Accessed March 6, 2024.
 4. Health risks of overweight and obesity. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/weight-management/adult-overweight-obesity/health-risks. Accessed March 6, 2024.
 5. Jensen MD, et al. 2013 AHA/ACC/TOS guideline for the management of overweight and obesity in adults: A report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines and The Obesity Society. Journal of the American College of Cardiology. 2014; doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2013.11.004.
 6. 2020-2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and U.S. Department of Agriculture. https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov. Accessed March 6, 2024.
 7. Physical activity for a healthy weight. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. https://www.cdc.gov/healthyweight/physical_activity/index.html. Accessed March 6, 2024.
 8. Cornier MA. A review of current guidelines for the treatment of obesity. American Journal of Managed Care. 2022; doi:10.37765/ajmc.2022.89292.

Physical fitness

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Physical fitness is a state of health and well-being and, more specifically, the ability to perform aspects of sports, occupations, and daily activities. Physical fitness is generally achieved through proper nutrition,[1] moderate-vigorous physical exercise,[2] and sufficient rest along with a formal recovery plan.[3]

Before the Industrial Revolution, fitness was defined as the capacity to carry out the day's activities without undue fatigue or lethargy. However, with automation and changes in lifestyles, physical fitness is now considered a measure of the body's ability to function efficiently and effectively in work and leisure activities, to be healthy, to resist hypokinetic diseases, to improve immune system function, and to meet emergency situations.[4]


Overview


Fitness is defined as the quality or state of being fit and healthy.[5] Around 1950, perhaps consistent with the Industrial Revolution and the treatise of World War II, the term "fitness" increased in western vernacular by a factor of ten.[6] The modern definition of fitness describes either a person or machine's ability to perform a specific function or a holistic definition of human adaptability to cope with various situations. This has led to an interrelation of human fitness and physical attractiveness that has mobilized global fitness and fitness equipment industries. Regarding specific function, fitness is attributed to persons who possess significant aerobic or anaerobic ability (i.e., endurance or strength). A well-rounded fitness program improves a person in all aspects of fitness compared to practicing only one, such as only cardio/respiratory or only weight training.

A comprehensive fitness program tailored to an individual typically focuses on one or more specific skills,[7] and on age-[8] or health-related needs such as bone health.[9] Many sources[10] also cite mental, social and emotional health as an important part of overall fitness. This is often presented in textbooks as a triangle made up of three points, which represent physical, emotional, and mental fitness. Physical fitness has been shown to have benefits in preventing ill health and assisting recovery from injury or illness. Along with the physical health benefits of fitness, it has also been shown to have a positive impact on mental health as well by assisting in treating anxiety and depression.[11] Physical fitness can also prevent or treat many other chronic health conditions brought on by unhealthy lifestyle or aging as well and has been listed frequently as one of the most popular and advantageous self-care therapies.[12] Working out can also help some people sleep better by building up sleeping pressure and possibly alleviate some mood disorders in certain individuals.[13]

Developing research has demonstrated that many of the benefits of exercise are mediated through the role of skeletal muscle as an endocrine organ. That is, contracting muscles release multiple substances known as myokines, which promote the growth of new tissue, tissue repair, and various anti-inflammatory functions, which in turn reduce the risk of developing various inflammatory diseases.[14]


Activity guidelines


The 2018 Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans were released by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services to provide science-based guidance for people ages 3 years and older to improve their health by participating in regular physical activity. These guidelines recommend that all adults should move more and sit less throughout the day to improve health-related quality of life including mental, emotional, and physical health. For substantial health benefits, adults should perform at least 150 to 300 minutes of moderate-intensity, or 75 to 150 minutes per week of vigorous-intensity aerobic physical activity, or an equivalent combination of both spread throughout the week.[15] The recommendation for physical activity to occur in bouts of at least 10 minutes has been eliminated, as new research suggests that bouts of any length contribute to the health benefits linked to the accumulated volume of physical activity. Additional health benefits may be achieved by engaging in more than 300 minutes (5 hours) of moderate-intensity physical activity per week. Adults should also do muscle-strengthening activities that are of moderate or greater intensity and involve all major muscle groups on two or more days a week, as these activities provide additional health benefits.[16]

Guidelines in the United Kingdom released in July 2011 include the following points: The intensity at which a person exercises is key, and light activity such as strolling and house work is unlikely to have much positive impact on the health of most people. For aerobic exercise to be beneficial, it must raise the heart rate and cause perspiration. A person should do a minimum of 150 minutes a week of moderate-intensity aerobic exercise. There are more health benefits gained if a person exercises beyond 150 minutes. Sedentary time (time spent not standing, such as when on a chair or in bed) is bad for a person's health, and no amount of exercise can negate the effects of sitting for too long. These guidelines are now much more in line with those used in the U.S., which also includes recommendations for muscle-building and bone-strengthening activities such as lifting weights and yoga.[17]


Exercise


Aerobic exercise


Cardiorespiratory fitness can be measured using VO2 max, a measure of the amount of oxygen the body can uptake and utilize.[18][19] Aerobic exercise, which improves cardiorespiratory fitness and increase stamina, involves movement that increases the heart rate to improve the body's oxygen consumption. This form of exercise is an important part of all training regiments, whether for professional athletes or for the everyday person.[20]

Prominent examples of aerobic exercises include:

 * Jogging – Running at a steady and gentle pace. This form of exercise is great for maintaining weight and building a cardiovascular base to later perform more intense exercises.
 * Working on elliptical trainer – This is a stationary exercise machine used to perform walking, or running without causing excessive stress on the joints. This form of exercise is perfect for people with achy hips, knees, and ankles.
 * Walking – Moving at a fairly regular pace for a short, medium or long distance.
 * Treadmill training – Many treadmills have programs set up that offer numerous different workout plans. One effective cardiovascular activity would be to switch between running and walking. Typically warm up first by walking and then switch off between walking for three minutes and running for three minutes.
 * Swimming – Using the arms and legs to keep oneself afloat in water and moving either forwards or backward. This is a good full-body exercise for those who are looking to strengthen their core while improving cardiovascular endurance.
 * Cycling – Riding a bicycle typically involves longer distances than walking or jogging. This is another low-impact exercise on the joints and is great for improving leg strength.[21]


Anaerobic exercise


Anaerobic exercise features high-intensity movements performed in a short period of time. It is a fast, high-intensity exercise that does not require the body to utilize oxygen to produce energy. It helps to promote strength, endurance, speed, and power; and is used by bodybuilders to build workout intensity. Anaerobic exercises are thought to increase the metabolic rate, thereby allowing one to burn additional calories as the body recovers from exercise due to an increase in body temperature and excess post-exercise oxygen consumption (EPOC) after the exercise ended.

Prominent examples of anaerobic exercises include:

 * Weight training – A common type of strength training for developing the strength and size of skeletal muscles.
 * Isometric exercise – Helps to maintain strength. A muscle action in which no visible movement occurs and the resistance matches the muscular tension.[22]
 * Sprinting – Running short distances as fast as possible, training for muscle explosiveness.[23]
 * Interval training – Alternating short bursts (lasting around 30 seconds) of intense activity with longer intervals (three to four minutes) of less intense activity. This type of activity also builds speed and endurance.[24]


Training


Specific or task-oriented fitness is a person's ability to perform in a specific activity, such as sports or military service, with a reasonable efficiency. Specific training prepares athletes to perform well in their sport. These include, among others:

 * 100 m sprint: In a sprint, the athlete must be trained to work anaerobically throughout the race, an example of how to do this would be interval training.
 * Century ride: Cyclists must be prepared aerobically for a bike ride of 100 miles or more.
 * Middle distance running: Athletes require both speed and endurance to gain benefit out of this training. The hard-working muscles are at their peak for a longer period of time as they are being used at that level for the longer period of time.[25]
 * Marathon: In this case, the athlete must be trained to work aerobically, and their endurance must be built-up to a maximum.
 * Many firefighters and police officers undergo regular fitness testing to determine if they are capable of the physically demanding tasks required of the job.[26]
 * Members of armed forces are often required to pass a formal fitness test. For example, soldiers of the U.S. Army must be able to pass the Army Physical Fitness Test (APFT).[27]
 * Hill sprints: Requires a high level of fitness to begin with; the exercise is particularly good for the leg muscles. The Army often trains to do mountain climbing and races.
 * Plyometric and isometric exercises: An excellent way to build strength and increase muscular endurance.
 * Sand running creates less strain on leg muscles than running on grass or concrete. This is because sand collapses beneath the foot, which softens the landing. Sand training is an effective way to lose weight and become fit, as more effort is needed (one and a half times more) to run on the soft sand than on a hard surface.[28]
 * Aquajogging is a form of exercise that decreases strain on joints and bones.[29] The water supplies minimal impact to muscles and bones, which is good for those recovering from injury. Furthermore, the resistance of the water as one jogs through it provides an enhanced effect of exercise (the deeper you are, the greater the force needed to pull your leg through).[30]
 * Swimming: Squatting exercise helps in enhancing a swimmer's start.[31]

For physical fitness activity to benefit an individual, the exertion must trigger a sufficient amount of stimuli. Exercise with the correct amount of intensity, duration, and frequency can produce a significant amount of improvement. The person may overall feel better, but the physical effects on the human body take weeks or months to notice—and possibly years for full development. For training purposes, exercise must provide a stress or demand on either a function or tissue. To continue improvements, this demand must eventually increase little over an extended period of time. This sort of exercise training has three basic principles: overload, specificity, and progression. These principles are related to health but also enhancement of physical working capacity.[32]


High intensity interval training


A man and a woman participating in high intensity events during a fitness competition

High-intensity interval training (HIIT) consists of repeated, short bursts of exercise, completed at a high level of intensity. These sets of intense activity are followed by a predetermined time of rest or low-intensity activity.[33] Studies have shown that exercising at a higher intensity can have the effect of increasing cardiac benefits for humans when compared with exercising at a low or moderate level.[34] When one's workout consists of a HIIT session, their body has to work harder to replace the oxygen it lost. Research into the benefits of HIIT have shown that it can be very successful for reducing fat, especially around the abdominal region.[35] Furthermore, when compared to continuous moderate exercise, HIIT proves to burn more calories and increase the amount of fat burned post- HIIT session.[36] Lack of time is one of the main reasons stated for not exercising; HIIT is a great alternative for those people because the duration of a HIIT session can be as short as 10 minutes, making it much quicker than conventional workouts.[37]


Effects


Controlling blood pressure


Physical fitness has been proven to support the body's blood pressure. Staying active and exercising regularly builds a stronger heart. The heart is the main organ in charge of systolic blood pressure and diastolic blood pressure. Engaging in a physical activity raises blood pressure. Once the subject stops the activity, the blood pressure returns to normal. The more physical activity, the easier this process becomes, resulting in a fitter cardiovascular profile.[38] Through regular physical fitness, it becomes easier to create a rise in blood pressure. This lowers the force on the arteries, and lowers the overall blood pressure.[39]


Cancer prevention


Centers for disease control and prevention provide lifestyle guidelines for maintaining a balanced diet and engaging in physical activity to reduce the risk of disease. The WCRF/ American Institute for Cancer Research (AICR) published a list of recommendations that reflect the dietary and exercise behaviors which are proven to reduce incidence of cancer.

The WCRF/AICR recommendations include the following:

 * Be as lean as possible without becoming underweight.
 * Each week, adults should engage in at least 150 minutes of moderate-intensity physical activity or 75 minutes of vigorous-intensity physical activity.
 * Children should engage in at least one hour of moderate or vigorous physical activity each week.
 * Be physically active for at least thirty minutes every day.
 * Avoid sugar, and limit the consumption of energy-packed foods.
 * Balance one's diet with a variety of vegetables, grains, fruits, legumes, etc.
 * Limit sodium intake and the consumption of red meats and processed meats.
 * Limit alcoholic drinks to two for men and one for women a day.[40]

These recommendations are also widely supported by the American Cancer Society. The guidelines have been evaluated and individuals who have higher guideline adherence scores have substantially reduced cancer risk as well as improved outcomes of a multitude of chronic health problems. Regular physical activity is a factor that helps reduce an individual's blood pressure and improves cholesterol levels, two key components that correlate with heart disease and type 2 diabetes.[41] The American Cancer Society encourages the public to "adopt a physically active lifestyle" by meeting the criteria in a variety of physical activities such as hiking, swimming, circuit training, resistance training, lifting, etc. It is understood that cancer is not a disease that can be cured by physical fitness alone, however, because it is a multifactorial disease, physical fitness is a controllable prevention. The large associations between physical fitness and reduced cancer risk are enough to provide a strategy of preventative interventions.[40] The American Cancer Society asserts different levels of activity ranging from moderate to vigorous to clarify the recommended time spent on a physical activity. These classifications of physical activity consider intentional exercise and basic activities performed on a daily basis and give the public a greater understanding of what fitness levels suffice as future disease prevention.


Inflammation


Studies have shown an association between increased physical activity and reduced inflammation.[42] It produces both a short-term inflammatory response and a long-term anti-inflammatory effect.[43] Physical activity reduces inflammation in conjunction with or independent of changes in body weight.[44] However, the mechanisms linking physical activity to inflammation are unknown.


Immune system


Physical activity boosts the immune system. This is dependent on the concentration of endogenous factors (such as sex hormones, metabolic hormones and growth hormones), body temperature, blood flow, hydration status and body position.[45] Physical activity has been shown to increase the levels of natural killer (NK) cells, NK T cells, macrophages, neutrophils and eosinophils, complements, cytokines, antibodies and T cytotoxic cells.[46][47] However, the mechanism linking physical activity to immune system is not fully understood.


Weight control


Achieving resilience through physical fitness promotes a vast and complex range of health-related benefits. Individuals who keep up physical fitness levels generally regulate their distribution of body fat and prevent obesity. Studies prove that running uses calories in the body that come from the macronutrients eaten daily. In order for the body to be able to run, it will use those ingested calories, therefore it will burn calories.[48] Abdominal fat, specifically visceral fat, is most directly affected by engaging in aerobic exercise. Strength training has been known to increase the amount of muscle in the body, however, it can also reduce body fat.[49] Sex steroid hormones, insulin, and appropriate immune responses are factors that mediate metabolism in relation to abdominal fat. Therefore, physical fitness provides weight control through regulation of these bodily functions.[50]


Menopause and physical fitness


Menopause is often said to have occurred when a woman has had no vaginal bleeding for over a year since her last menstrual cycle. There are a number of symptoms connected to menopause, most of which can affect the quality of life of a woman involved in this stage of her life. One way to reduce the severity of the symptoms is to exercise and keep a healthy level of fitness. Prior to and during menopause, as the female body changes, there can be physical, physiological or internal changes to the body. These changes can be reduced or even prevented with regular exercise. These changes include:[51]

 * Preventing weight gain: around menopause women tend to experience a reduction in muscle mass and an increase in fat levels. Increasing the amount of physical exercise undertaken can help to prevent these changes.
 * Reducing the risk of breast cancer: weight loss from regular exercise may offer protection from breast cancer.
 * Strengthening bones: physical activity can slow the bone loss associated with menopause, reducing the chance of bone fractures and osteoporosis.
 * Reducing the risk of disease: excess weight can increase the risk of heart disease and type 2 diabetes, and regular physical activity can counter these effects.
 * Boosting mood: being involved in regular activities can improve psychological health, an effect that can be seen at any age and not just during or after menopause.[52]

The Melbourne Women's Midlife Health Project followed 438 women over an eight-year period providing evidence showing that even though physical activity was not associated with vasomotor symptoms (more commonly known as hot flashes) in this cohort at the beginning, women who reported they were physically active every day at the beginning were 49% less likely to have reported bothersome hot flushes. This is in contrast to women whose level of activity decreased and were more likely to experience bothersome hot flushes.[53]


Mental health


Studies have shown that physical activity can improve mental health and well-being.[54][55] This improvement is due to an increase in blood flow to the brain, allowing for the release of hormones as well as a decrease of stress hormone levels in the body (e.g., cortisol, adrenaline) while also stimulating the human body's mood boosters and natural painkillers.[56] Not only does exercise release these feel-good hormones, it can also help relieve stress and help build confidence.[57] The same way exercising can help humans to have a healthier life, it also can improve sleep quality. Based on studies, even 10 minutes of exercise per day can help insomnia.[58] These trends improve as physical activity is performed on a consistent basis, which makes exercise effective in relieving symptoms of depression and anxiety, positively impacting mental health and bringing about several other benefits. For example:[59]

 * Physical activity has been linked to the alleviation of depression and anxiety symptoms.[54]
 * In patients with schizophrenia, physical fitness has been shown to improve their quality of life and decrease the effects of schizophrenia.[60]
 * Being fit can improve one's self-esteem.
 * Working out can improve one's mental alertness and it can reduce fatigue.
 * Studies[which?] have shown a reduction in stress levels.
 * Increased opportunity for social interaction, allowing for improved social skills[59]

To achieve some of these benefits, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention suggests at least 30–60 minutes of exercise 3-5 times a week.[61]

 * Different forms of exercise have been proven to improve mental health and reduce the risk of depression, anxiety, and suicide.
 * Benefits of Exercise on Mental health include ... Improved sleep, Stress relief, Improvement in mood, Increased energy and stamina, Reduced tiredness that can increase mental alertness. There are beneficial effects for mental health as well as physical health when it comes to exercise.[62]


History


In the 1940s, an emigrant M.D. from Austria named Hans Kraus began testing children in the U.S. and Europe for what he termed, "Muscular Fitness." (in other words, muscular functionality) Through his testing, he found children in the U.S. to be far less physically capable than European children. Kraus published some alarming papers in various journals and got the attention of some powerful people, including a senator from Pennsylvania who took the findings to President Dwight D. Eisenhower. President Eisenhower was "shocked." He set up a series of conferences and committees; then in July 1956, Eisenhower established the President's Council on Youth Fitness.

In Greece, physical fitness was considered to be an essential component of a healthy life and it was the norm for men to frequent a gymnasium. Physical fitness regimes were also considered to be of paramount importance in a nation's ability to train soldiers for an effective military force. Partly for these reasons, organized fitness regimes have been in existence throughout known history and evidence of them can be found in many countries.

Gymnasiums which would seem familiar today began to become increasingly common in the 19th century. The industrial revolution had led to a more sedentary lifestyle for many people and there was an increased awareness that this had the potential to be harmful to health. This was a key motivating factor for the forming of a physical culture movement, especially in Europe and the USA. This movement advocated increased levels of physical fitness for men, women, and children and sought to do so through various forms of indoor and outdoor activity, and education. In many ways, it laid the foundations for modern fitness culture.[63]


Education


The following is a list of some institutions that educate people about physical fitness:

 * American Council on Exercise (ACE)
 * National Academy of Sports Medicine (NASM)
 * International Sports Science Association (ISSA)


See also


 * 20th century women's fitness culture
 * Bodybuilding – Control and development of musculature
 * Fitness fashion – Sociocultural phenomenon surrounding exercise and physical fitness
 * Fitness professional – professional in the field of fitness and exercise, most often instruction, including aerobics and yoga instructors and authors of fitness instruction books or manuals
 * Fundamental movement skill – Learned ability involving specific body movements for a task
 * Healthy diet – Type of diet
 * History of physical training and fitness – Historical physical training methods
 * Outline of exercise – Overview of and topical guide to exercise
 * Personal trainer – Individual who provides others with fitness training and instruction
 * Power training – Common type of speed and strength training
 * Thermoregulation in humans – Aspect of homeostasis
 * Unilateral exercise – Single limb physical exercise


References


 1.  ^ Tremblay MS, Colley RC, Saunders TJ, Healy GN, Owen N (December 2010). "Physiological and health implications of a sedentary lifestyle". Applied Physiology, Nutrition, and Metabolism. 35 (6): 725–40. doi:10.1139/H10-079. PMID 21164543. S2CID 3080739.
 2.  ^ de Groot GC, Fagerström L (June 2011). "Older adults' motivating factors and barriers to exercise to prevent falls". Scandinavian Journal of Occupational Therapy. 18 (2): 153–60. doi:10.3109/11038128.2010.487113. PMID 20545467. S2CID 41105819.
 3.  ^ Malina R (2010). Physical activity and health of youth. Constanța: Ovidius University Annals, Series Physical Education and Sport/Science, Movement and Health.
 4.  ^ "President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports Definitions for Health, Fitness, and Physical Activity". fitness.gov. Archived from the original on 12 July 2012.
 5.  ^ "Definition of FITNESS". www.merriam-webster.com. Retrieved 19 September 2021.
 6.  ^ "Google Books Ngram Viewer". books.google.com. Retrieved 19 September 2021.
 7.  ^ Colfer GR (19 January 2004). "Skill-related physical fitness essential for sports success". United States Army Training and Doctrine Command. Archived from the original on 17 June 2011.
 8.  ^ Nied RJ, Franklin B (February 2002). "Promoting and prescribing exercise for the elderly". American Family Physician. 65 (3): 419–26. PMID 11858624.
 9.  ^ "Exercise for Your Bone Health | NIH Osteoporosis and Related Bone Diseases National Resource Center". www.bones.nih.gov. Retrieved 19 September 2021.
 10. ^ "Participation in Sport and Physical Recreation, Australia". Australian Bureau of Statistics. 18 February 2015.
 11. ^ Volkwein-Caplan, Karin (2014). Sport, Fitness, Culture. Meyer & Meyer Sport. p. 78. ISBN 9781782550419.
 12. ^ "Physical Activity Fundamental To Preventing Disease". U.S. Department of Health & Human Services. 20 June 2002. Archived from the original on 11 November 2014.
 13. ^ "How much physical activity do adults need?". Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1 December 2011. Retrieved 29 April 2013.
 14. ^ Pedersen BK, Febbraio MA (April 2012). "Muscles, exercise, and obesity: skeletal muscle as a secretory organ". Nature Reviews. Endocrinology. 8 (8): 457–65. doi:10.1038/nrendo.2012.49. PMID 22473333. S2CID 205480628.
 15. ^ "Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans" (PDF). U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2nd ed.). 2018. Retrieved 22 May 2023.
 16. ^ "Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans 2nd edition" (PDF). U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2018.
 17. ^ "Exercise". nhs.uk. 26 April 2018. Retrieved 19 September 2021.
 18. ^ Haskell WL, Troiano RP, Hammond JA, Phillips MJ, Strader LC, Marquez DX, Grant SF, Ramos E (May 2012). "Physical activity and physical fitness: standardizing assessment with the PhenX Toolkit". American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 42 (5): 486–92. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2011.11.017. PMC 3331998. PMID 22516489.
 19. ^ Chakravertty B, Parkavi K, Coumary SA, Felix AJ (April 2012). "Antepartum cardiorespiratory fitness (CRF) quantification by estimation of maximal oxygen consumption (Vo2 max) in pregnant South Indian women". Journal of the Indian Medical Association. 110 (4): 214–7. PMID 23025219.
 20. ^ "Training for Cardiovascular Fitness" (PDF). University of Colorado Hospital, Aurora. 2003. Retrieved 22 May 2023.
 21. ^ Osawa Y, Azuma K, Tabata S, Katsukawa F, Ishida H, Oguma Y, Kawai T, Itoh H, Okuda S, Matsumoto H (2014). "Effects of 16-week high-intensity interval training using upper and lower body ergometers on aerobic fitness and morphological changes in healthy men: a preliminary study". Open Access Journal of Sports Medicine. 5: 257–65. doi:10.2147/OAJSM.S68932. PMC 4226445. PMID 25395872.
 22. ^ "Are isometric exercises good for strength training?". Mayo Clinic. Retrieved 22 May 2023.
 23. ^ Mateo, Ashley (8 December 2022). "The Best Sprint Workouts to Get Faster, Build Muscle, and Drop Fat". Men's Journal. Retrieved 22 May 2023.
 24. ^ "Boost Your Speed and Endurance With a Simple Exercise Plan". Verywell Fit. Retrieved 22 May 2023.
 25. ^ Mackenzie B (2001). "Middle Distance Running". Middle Distance Running. BrianMac Sports Coach.
 26. ^ "Training: Physical Fitness Program". sccfd.org. Archived from the original on 30 June 2014.
 27. ^ "Enlist : Army Physical Fitness Test". Army.com. Archived from the original on 6 January 2010.
 28. ^ M.S, Sasha Aparicio. "The Benefits of Sand Running for Physical Fitness". afpafitness.com. Retrieved 3 December 2022.
 29. ^ Shelley, Jake (11 May 2016). "Aquajogging: how, when and why to try it". TheGuardian.com. Retrieved 3 December 2022.
 30. ^ Harriman D (28 January 2015). "Aqua Jogging for Runners". livestrong.com.
 31. ^ Swimming Anatomy. Human Kinetics. 2010. p. 147. ISBN 9781450409179.
 32. ^ Blair SN (December 1993). "1993 C.H. McCloy Research Lecture: physical activity, physical fitness, and health". Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport. 64 (4): 365–76. doi:10.1080/02701367.1993.10607589. PMID 8278662.
 33. ^ Wisløff, Ulrik; Ellingsen, Øyvind; Kemi, Ole J. (July 2009). "High-Intensity Interval Training to Maximize Cardiac Benefits of Exercise Training?". Exercise and Sport Sciences Reviews. 37 (3): 139–146. doi:10.1097/JES.0b013e3181aa65fc. PMID 19550205. S2CID 25057561.
 34. ^ Gillen JB, Gibala MJ (March 2014). "Is high-intensity interval training a time-efficient exercise strategy to improve health and fitness?". Applied Physiology, Nutrition, and Metabolism. 39 (3): 409–12. doi:10.1139/apnm-2013-0187. PMID 24552392.
 35. ^ Giannaki, Christoforos D.; Aphamis, George; Sakkis, Panikos; Hadjicharalambous, Marios (April 2016). "Eight weeks of a combination of high intensity interval training and conventional training reduce visceral adiposity and improve physical fitness: a group-based intervention". The Journal of Sports Medicine and Physical Fitness. 56 (4): 483–490. PMID 25567049.
 36. ^ Shiraev T, Barclay G (December 2012). "Evidence based exercise - clinical benefits of high-intensity interval training". Australian Family Physician. 41 (12): 960–2. PMID 23210120.
 37. ^ Whitehurst, Michael (September 2012). "High-Intensity Interval Training: An Alternative for Older Adults". American Journal of Lifestyle Medicine. 6 (5): 382–386. doi:10.1177/1559827612450262. S2CID 72948004.
 38. ^ "Exercise: A Drug-free Approach to Lowering High Blood Pressure". mayoclinic.org.
 39. ^ "Blood Pressure : Exercise & Activity Lower Blood Pressure". bloodpressureuk.org.
 40. ^ a b Alberts, David S. and Hess, Lisa M. (2005). Fundamentals of Cancer Prevention. Berlin: Springer, ISBN 364238983X.
 41. ^ U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Physical Activity and Health: A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, 1996.
 42. ^ Colbert LH, Visser M, Simonsick EM, Tracy RP, Newman AB, Kritchevsky SB, Pahor M, Taaffe DR, Brach J, Rubin S, Harris TB (July 2004). "Physical activity, exercise, and inflammatory markers in older adults: findings from the Health, Aging and Body Composition Study". Journal of the American Geriatrics Society. 52 (7): 1098–104. doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2004.52307.x. PMID 15209647. S2CID 21589600.
 43. ^ Kasapis C, Thompson PD (May 2005). "The effects of physical activity on serum C-reactive protein and inflammatory markers: a systematic review". Journal of the American College of Cardiology. 45 (10): 1563–9. doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2004.12.077. PMID 15893167.
 44. ^ Campbell KL, McTiernan A (January 2007). "Exercise and biomarkers for cancer prevention studies". The Journal of Nutrition. 137 (1 Suppl): 161S – 169S. doi:10.1093/jn/137.1.161S. PMID 17182820.
 45. ^ Nieman DC (March 1997). "Exercise immunology: practical applications". International Journal of Sports Medicine. 18 (Suppl 1): S91–100. doi:10.1055/s-2007-972705. PMID 9129268. S2CID 6526886.
 46. ^ Fairey AS, Courneya KS, Field CJ, Mackey JR (January 2002). "Physical exercise and immune system function in cancer survivors: a comprehensive review and future directions". Cancer. 94 (2): 539–51. doi:10.1002/cncr.10244. PMID 11900239. S2CID 24526200.
 47. ^ Kruijsen-Jaarsma M, Révész D, Bierings MB, Buffart LM, Takken T (1 January 2013). "Effects of exercise on immune function in patients with cancer: a systematic review". Exercise Immunology Review. 19: 120–43. PMID 23977724.
 48. ^ "How Many Calories Are Burned Running a 10 Minute Mile?". LIVESTRONG.COM. Retrieved 1 December 2022.
 49. ^ Westcott WL, La Rosa Loud R (2014). "Strength for fat loss training". American Fitness. 32 (1): 18–22.
 50. ^ Westerlind KC (November 2003). "Physical activity and cancer prevention--mechanisms". Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise. 35 (11): 1834–40. doi:10.1249/01.MSS.0000093619.37805.B7. PMID 14600547.
 51. ^ Sternfeld B, Dugan S (September 2011). "Physical activity and health during the menopausal transition". Obstetrics and Gynecology Clinics of North America. 38 (3): 537–66. doi:10.1016/j.ogc.2011.05.008. PMC 3270074. PMID 21961719.
 52. ^ Pruthi S (June 2013). "Fitness Tips for Menopause: Why fitness counts". Mayo Clinic. Retrieved 11 April 2015.
 53. ^ Eschbach C (12 January 2012). "Exercise Recommendations for Menopause-Aged Women". American College of Sports Medicine. Retrieved 12 April 2015.
 54. ^ a b Callaghan P (August 2004). "Exercise: a neglected intervention in mental health care?". Journal of Psychiatric and Mental Health Nursing. 11 (4): 476–83. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2850.2004.00751.x. PMID 15255923.
 55. ^ "Physical activity and mental health". 7 August 2015.
 56. ^ Publishing, Harvard Health (February 2011). "Exercising to relax". Harvard Health. Retrieved 23 December 2020.
 57. ^ "Depression and anxiety: exercise eases symptoms". Mayo Clinic. Retrieved 16 June 2021.
 58. ^ Youngstedt, Shawn D; Kline, Christopher E (August 2006). "Epidemiology of exercise and sleep". Sleep and Biological Rhythms. 4 (3): 215–221. doi:10.1111/j.1479-8425.2006.00235.x. ISSN 1446-9235. PMC 4217702. PMID 25374476.
 59. ^ a b Sharma A, Madaan V, Petty FD (2006). "Exercise for mental health". Primary Care Companion to the Journal of Clinical Psychiatry. 8 (2): 106. doi:10.4088/PCC.v08n0208a. PMC 1470658. PMID 16862239.
 60. ^ Vancampfort D, Probst M, Scheewe T, De Herdt A, Sweers K, Knapen J, van Winkel R, De Hert M (May 2013). "Relationships between physical fitness, physical activity, smoking and metabolic and mental health parameters in people with schizophrenia". Psychiatry Research. 207 (1–2): 25–32. doi:10.1016/j.psychres.2012.09.026. PMID 23051886. S2CID 35810181.
 61. ^ "Benefits of Physical Activity". Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 6 March 2018. Retrieved 30 April 2018.
 62. ^ Sharma, Ashish; Madaan, Vishal; Petty, Frederick D. (15 April 2006). "Exercise for Mental Health". The Primary Care Companion to the Journal of Clinical Psychiatry. 08 (2): 106. doi:10.4088/pcc.v08n0208a. PMC 1470658. PMID 16862239.
 63. ^ "Physical Fitness History".


External links


Wikimedia Commons has media related to Fitness.

 * "Exercise and Physical Fitness". medlineplus.gov.


What Is Physical Fitness?

Physical fitness encompasses many factors, including body composition, flexibility, and endurance, but it boils down to having sufficient energy and physical strength to complete tasks. Maintaining physical fitness may contribute to a better quality of life, overall longevity, and lower blood pressure, in addition to potentially decreasing the risk of chronic diseases like heart disease and Type 2 diabetes.


Meet One of Your New Instructors


3 Types of Physical Fitness

Your body’s overall fitness consists of three parameters, and your fitness program should ideally reflect that (in addition to incorporating all of the major muscle groups) to help you achieve full-body fitness:

 1. 1. Aerobic or cardiovascular fitness: Aerobic fitness is your body’s ability to pump oxygenated blood through your blood vessels, especially as you engage in activities that raise your heart rate for an extended period. If you’re able to perform cardio—like running, swimming, or biking—for long stretches, you have a high level of aerobic fitness.
 2. 2. Muscle-strengthening or anaerobic fitness: Anaerobic fitness is how much work your muscles can take on (and for what length of time) without needing rest and is reflected in your total muscle mass. Strength training increases anaerobic fitness, so being able to bench press beyond your body weight or perform many squats in a row can indicate your anaerobic fitness level.
 3. 3. Flexibility: Your muscles shorten after physical activity and exertion; flexibility measures how much stretch your muscles have. You can improve your flexibility through regular stretching and flexibility exercises like yoga.


5 Components of Fitness

Holistic physical fitness breaks down along the following lines and incorporates many types of exercise to address all five components of physical fitness:

 1. 1. Body composition: Body composition generally refers to your body’s overall fat content. While body mass index (BMI) is a rough indication of fitness in relation to body composition, it also leaves out many factors that contribute to overall physical health and wellness. Consider your body fat content as only one small part of your overall fitness.
 2. 2. Cardiovascular or cardiorespiratory endurance: Cardiovascular endurance measures how long your body can sustain physically taxing aerobic exercise. For example, a sprinter who can run fast but only for a short period doesn’t necessarily have high cardiovascular endurance. They could, however, incorporate sprinting into an interval training routine that alternates sprinting with rest for a longer period; doing so would build up cardiovascular endurance.
 3. 3. Flexibility: Your flexibility amounts to how close you can get to exercising a full range of motion for your muscles. The sit and reach test, in which you extend your legs straight in front of you and reach with both hands toward your toes, is a classic measure of flexibility.
 4. 4. Muscular endurance: Muscular endurance is distinct from muscular strength because it’s a matter of how long your muscles can perform work without rest. For example, performing many sit-ups or push-ups indicates muscular endurance, whereas powerlifting with very heavy weights does not.
 5. 5. Muscular strength: You can measure your muscular strength by the maximal force produced by a given muscle or muscle group. Incorporating a weight-training program with increasingly heavier weights into your fitness training can help you build up muscle strength over time.


How to Work out Safely and Avoid Injury

If you have a previous or pre-existing health condition, consult your physician before beginning an exercise program. Proper exercise technique is essential to ensure the safety and effectiveness of an exercise program. Still, you may need to modify each exercise to attain optimal results based on your individual needs. Always select a weight that allows you to control your body throughout the movement completely. When performing any exercise, pay close attention to your body, and stop immediately if you note pain or discomfort.

To see continual progress and build body strength, incorporate proper warm-ups, rest, and nutrition into your exercise program. Your results will ultimately be based on your ability to recover from your workouts adequately. Rest for twenty-four to forty-eight hours before training the same muscle groups to allow sufficient recovery.


Want to Dive Deeper Into Your Wellness Journey?

Throw on some athleisure, fire up a MasterClass Annual Membership, and get ready to sweat it out with exclusive instructional videos from Nike Master Trainer and GQ fitness specialist Joe Holder. Want to improve your cardiovascular endurance? Give Joe’s HIIT workout a go. Trying to get a little swole? He’s got a strength training workout for that. From fitness tips to nutrition hacks, Joe will have you feeling healthier in no time.

Featured MasterClass Instructor


Physical Activity and Your Weight and Health | Healthy Weight and Growth

* Regular physical activity provides immediate and long-term health benefits.
 * Being physically active can help you maintain a healthy weight.
 * How much physical activity you need to maintain a healthy weight varies by individual.


Why it's important

Regular physical activity provides immediate and long-term health benefits. Being physically active can improve your brain health. Other benefits include stronger bones and muscles and better ability to perform everyday activities.

Physical activity also helps:

 * Improve sleep quality.
 * Reduce high blood pressure and risk of heart disease and stroke.
 * Reduce risk of type 2 diabetes.
 * Reduce risk of several forms of cancer.
 * Reduce arthritis pain and associated disability.
 * Reduce risk of osteoporosis and falls.
 * Reduce symptoms of depression and anxiety.

In addition, physical activity is important if you are trying to lose weight or maintain a healthy weight. More physical activity increases the number of calories your body uses for energy. Using calories through physical activity, combined with reducing the calories you eat, creates a calorie deficit that results in weight loss.

Most weight loss occurs from decreasing calories. However, the only way to maintain weight loss is to engage in regular physical activity.


How much physical activity do I need?

For overall health, adults need at least 150 minutes a week of moderate-intensity aerobic activity. This could be brisk walking 22 minutes a day; 30 minutes a day, 5 days a week; or what works for your schedule. Alternatively, you could do 75 minutes of vigorous-intensity aerobic activity each week, such as swimming laps. Or you could do an equivalent combination of moderate- and vigorous-intensity aerobic activity each week. Adults also need at least 2 days a week of muscle-strengthening activity. See recommendations for different groups.

You may need more than the recommended minutes of physical activity a week to maintain your weight. The exact amount of physical activity needed to maintain a healthy weight varies greatly from person to person.

To lose weight and keep it off, you will need a high amount of physical activity unless you also adjust your diet to reduce the number of calories you eat and drink. Getting to and staying at a healthy weight requires both regular physical activity and healthy eating patterns.


What do moderate- and vigorous-intensity mean?

With moderate-intensity physical activity, breathing and heart rate are noticeably faster, but you can still carry on a conversation.

Examples include:

 * Walking briskly (a 15-minute mile).
 * Light yard work (raking/bagging leaves or pushing a lawn mower).
 * Light snow shoveling.
 * Actively playing with children.
 * Biking at a casual pace.

With vigorous-intensity physical activity, your heart rate increases substantially. You are breathing too hard to have a conversation.

Examples include:

 * Jogging/running.
 * Swimming laps.
 * Rollerblading/inline skating at a brisk pace.
 * Cross-country skiing.
 * Most competitive sports (football, basketball, and soccer).
 * Jumping rope.


How many calories are used in typical activities?

The following tables show calories used in common physical activities at both moderate and vigorous levels.

Light gardening/yard work

Golf (walking and carrying clubs)

Weight lifting (general light workout)

Swimming (slow freestyle laps)

Heavy yard work (chopping wood)

Weight lifting (vigorous effort)

1 Calories burned will be higher for persons who weigh more than 154 lbs (70 kg) and lower for people who weigh less. Adapted from Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2005, page 16, Table 4.

December 27, 2023

IN BRIEF This article reviews the impact of exercise on weight loss and weight maintenance and the possible reasons that weight loss outcomes resulting from exercise are not consistently realized.

Energy balance is a process through which the body attempts to establish homeostasis. Most individuals spend much of their lives in the same weight range without daily focus on caloric intake and output. The two parts of the equation for weight maintenance are energy intake (eating and drinking) versus energy output (nonexercise thermogenesis + exercise). To achieve weight loss, the American Diabetes Association (ADA) (1), American Academy of Clinical Endocrinologists (AACE) (2), and National Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics (3) all recommend exercise as an integral part of any weight loss program. Physical activity and exercise are often used interchangeably. However, correctly defined, physical activity is all movement that creates energy expenditure, whereas exercise is planned, structured physical activity (1).

Research supports the importance of exercise in relationship to improved cardiovascular fitness, insulin sensitivity, glycemic control of type 2 diabetes, blood pressure, and depression scores (1), but does exercise itself contribute to weight loss and maintenance efforts?

The questions addressed in this article are: Does exercise in and of itself improve weight loss efforts outside of dietary restriction? Is there a difference between aerobic training and resistance training in achieving weight loss or weight maintenance? What are the potential explanations for less weight loss than predicted with exercise? When weight loss is achieved through any weight loss intervention program, does exercise contribute to the maintenance of that weight loss?
Does Exercise in and of Itself Improve Weight Loss Efforts?

Many outcomes data have been reported from research studies that have examined exercise alone, exercise plus dietary restriction, or dietary restriction alone to determine strategies for weight loss. The challenge over time is to accurately monitor both sides of the equation as individuals interact in their daily lives.

A systematic review of studies with a minimum of 1-year follow-up (4) suggested that subjects who used exercise alone for weight reduction experienced minimal weight loss. There are two questions that need clarification: 1) Does the drive for homeostasis require greater bouts of exercise than previously recommended to contribute to weight loss? 2) Do individuals compensate for exercise by either eating more or reducing their nonexercise activity thermogenesis?

Thirty-six overweight participants were assigned to either exercise plus calorie restriction or calorie restriction alone to determine whether exercise enhanced weight loss efforts. The calorie deficit remained constant during the 6-month trial. Ten percent weight loss was achieved over 6 months in both interventions without a statistically significant difference in the percentage loss of body fat. However, the exercise group had the added benefit of improved aerobic fitness (5).

In a randomized, controlled trial of 52 obese men (BMI 31.3 ± 2.0 kg/m2), Ross et al. (6) demonstrated a body weight decrease of 7.5 kg over 3 months in the exercise-only group (16 men) that was comparable to that of the calorie-restricted group. Duration of exercise was based on the goal of a daily 700-calorie energy expenditure (∼60 min/day), suggesting that performing exercise greater than the minimum national recommendations for health of 150 min/week may be required to achieve clinically meaningful weight loss.

Donnelly et al. (7) demonstrated weight loss with exercise alone in a group of 141 overweight or obese (BMI 31 kg/m2) men and women in the Midwest Exercise Trial 2. Exercise was supervised for 10 months with an exercise calorie-equivalent reduction of either 400 or 600 calories 5 days per week and a completion rate of 65%. In the completion group, weight losses were 3.9 ± 4.9 and 5.2 ± 5.6 kg, respectively. This demonstrated a clinically significant weight loss for both men and women. However, the amount of activity to achieve this weight loss was again greater than the general exercise recommendations for health.

Weiss et al. (8) demonstrated not only effective weight loss (7% over 16.8 weeks) with exercise alone, but also preservation of lean body mass (LBM) and improvement of maximal oxygen consumption (VO2max) when compared to weight loss with a comparable energy deficit through calorie restriction alone; the latter resulted in both a loss of LBM and a decrease in VO2max. In addition, as with other studies that have demonstrated weight loss with exercise, the amount of exercise was substantial at 7.4 ± 0.5 hours/week.

Longer bouts of exercise have demonstrated a greater contribution to weight loss, both in controlled research trials and through self-reported information collected by the National Weight Control Registry (NWCR) (9–11). The NWCR has reported that 94% of individuals in the registry reported including exercise in their weight loss program (9); weight loss was greater in the group with the greatest physical activity, but this group also reported more dietary restraint (10), and only 1% of participants reported exercise alone for weight loss (11).

Most, but not all, study data indicate that exercise alone plays a very small role in weight loss. A joint position statement of the American College of Sports Medicine and the ADA (12) states that the “recommended levels of PA [physical activity] may help produce weight loss. However, up to 60 min/day may be required when relying on exercise alone for weight loss.”

The 2016 AACE and the AmericanCollege of Endocrinology comprehensive clinical practice guidelines for medical care of patients with obesity (13) include an evidence recommendation for “aerobic training of ≥150 min/week of moderate intensity, with better outcomes with increasing amounts and intensity of exercise.”
Is There a Difference Between Aerobic Training and Resistance Training or the Intensity of Activity in Achieving Weight Loss or Weight Maintenance?

Willis et al. (14) compared aerobic exercise (calorie equivalent to 12 miles/week), resistance exercise (3 days/week), and a combination of the two to determine changes in body mass with a consistent program of exercise and without alternations in reported energy intake in a group of individuals who were previously sedentary and without diabetes (BMI 25–35 kg/m2). Weight loss and fat mass reduction occurred with aerobic training to a more significant degree than with resistance training after the 8-month trial (1.76 vs. 0.83 kg for the aerobic and resistance groups, respectively). Adding resistance training did not enhance the change in total body mass compared to aerobic training alone. Over the 8-month study period, there was minimum weight change, suggesting the need for greater energy expenditure to contribute to major weight loss.

Exercise regimens of varying intensities and durations were added to a calorie- and fat-restricted food plan in a randomized, controlled trial by Jakicic et al. (15). Although not statistically significant, an absolute difference in weight loss of 1.7 kg was achieved with more vigorous and higher-duration exercise at 12 months.
What Are Potential Explanations for Less Weight Loss Than Predicted From Exercise?

The amount of weight loss predicted based on calculated energy expenditure often does not reflect the actual weight lost during research trials. Possible explanations include physiological compensation (less nonexercise activity) and limited control of food intake day by day for the duration of the trial, with the potential for compensatory food intake.

Thomas et al. (16) suggested in their review of 15 studies that the small amount of weight loss observed is the result of a combination of the low level of prescribed exercise and a subsequent increase in calorie intake.

A recent meta-analysis of 51 trials (17) suggested that in the short term, energy intake does not compensate for energy expenditure. Two to 14 hours after exercise bouts of 30–120 min at 36–81% VO2max, the difference in absolute energy intake between exercise and control groups was small; however, a reduction in relative energy intake of >119 calories was noted in 25 of 29 studies within the 51 trials.

Blundell et al. (18) suggested a considerable individual variability with regard to exercise and appetite/food intake. Influences on intake include fat and fat-free mass, resting metabolic rate, and hormonal responses, which vary from person to person, making the individual response to exercise and weight loss difficult to predict.

The article by Caudwell et al. (19) is in agreement with this assessment. These researchers developed an approach to assessing adaptive regulatory biological systems to determine the impact of physical activity on appetite and its contribution in turn to the impact on weight. There appeared to be a large difference in individual responses to physical activity. Neither nonexercise activity nor resting metabolic rate changed significantly. Nonresponders to weight loss strategies demonstrated a much greater degree of hunger and subsequent food intake, which was sufficient in quantity to explain the weight differences.

Research findings suggest that there are responders and nonresponders to exercise as a weight loss tool. Energy intake compensation over the long term may partly explain this variability.
When Weight Loss Is Achieved, Does Exercise Contribute to the Maintenance of That Weight Loss?

Physical activity may be an important component of weight maintenance after weight loss. An excellent study that measured total energy expenditure with the doubly labeled water method suggested that physical activity in the range of 11–12 kcal/kg/day (900 calories/day for an 81-kg woman) may be important to prevent weight regain (20). In the NWCR, 90% of participants reported exercise to achieve long-term weight loss maintenance, with an average 383-calorieenergy expenditure 7 days/week (21). In addition, a systematic review of the literature by Fogelholm and Kukkonen-Harjula (22) suggested that an increase in energy expenditure of 1,500–2,000 calories/week is associated with weight maintenance. In a 33-year follow-up study, men who maintained activity >150 min/weekgained 5.6 kg compared to 9.1 kg in less active men, with an even more significant trend (3.8 vs. 9.5 kg) among women (23).

Tate et al. (24) reported that, in a 30-month study of 202 overweight adults, those whose exercise expenditure was >2,500 calories/week had less than half the weight regain of those whose exercise expenditure was <2,500 calories/week (2.9 vs. >6 kg).

There is also evidence to support the notion that individuals who are less physically active are more likely to gain weight over time than those who exercise between 150 and 300 min/week (25).

Recent research based on the NWCR showed that both high- and low-exercise groups were able to maintain weight loss for 3 years. This suggests that there is a great deal of variability in individual responses to the ability to maintain weight loss over time (10).
Strategies to Promote Physical Activity in Practice

Although exercise contributes to multiple health benefits, and most of the research suggests that it can play a role in both short- and long-term weight loss and weight maintenance, patients often have a difficult time engaging in a regular exercise program and continuing that program as a lifestyle modification. Thirty-six percent of people >18 years of age with diabetes reported no physical activity in the previous 30 days (26). Only 30% of patients are counseled about exercise during an appointment with their primary care physician (27). Starting with the first encounter, physicians and other health professionals should engage patients in a discussion of the importance of daily exercise, which may promote weight loss in overweight people, but also reduce weight gain over time, contributing to overall health.

A recent article addressing strategies for promoting physical activity in clinical practice (28) provided excellent suggestions for engaging patients in physical activity. These include lifestyle modification suggestions such as getting up out of a chair and walking for 2 min every 30–60 min, connecting patients with physical activity professionals to create individualized programs that work for them, using mobile technology applications, and creating a “Walk with a Doc” program in the local community.
Conclusion

The evidence that exercise contributes significantly to weight loss and weight maintenance is not firmly established. It is important to recognize the challenge of monitoring dietary intake and exercise intensity and duration over the long term. Overreporting of actual exercise and underreporting of food intake by individuals could be a contributing factor to the mixed results found to date. In addition, individual differences may play a role (responders vs. nonresponders). Variability in sex, BMI, exercise intensity and duration, and type of exercise in research studies make conclusive recommendations more difficult. Minimal research has been focused specifically on the weight loss effects of exercise alone in individuals with type 2 diabetes, who may have a different response to exercise than the population without diabetes.

Consistently performing exercise of a duration greater than the basic recommendations for health (150 min/week of moderate-intensity exercise) does appear to be more likely to contribute to weight loss and weight maintenance efforts over the long term.

Physical activity of all types, including aerobic, resistance, flexibility exercises, and reduced sedentary time clearly results in multiple health benefits for individuals with type 2 diabetes and should be included in any lifestyle recommendations for individuals with diabetes (1). Encouraging individuals to exercise for longer periods of time each day may help to enhance weight loss. However, it is challenging for some patients to consistently achieve even small bouts of exercise daily. In counseling patients, it is important not to focus on the potential for weight loss as the sole outcome from exercise, but rather to suggest that exercise may contribute to weight loss efforts and does result in a myriad of other health-related benefits. This focus will reduce the likelihood of patients using the lack of weight loss as a reason to discontinue their exercise program.
Duality of Interest

No potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article were reported.
References


Physical Activity and Your Weight and Health | Healthy Weight and Growth

* Regular physical activity provides immediate and long-term health benefits.
 * Being physically active can help you maintain a healthy weight.
 * How much physical activity you need to maintain a healthy weight varies by individual.


Why it's important

Regular physical activity provides immediate and long-term health benefits. Being physically active can improve your brain health. Other benefits include stronger bones and muscles and better ability to perform everyday activities.

Physical activity also helps:

 * Improve sleep quality.
 * Reduce high blood pressure and risk of heart disease and stroke.
 * Reduce risk of type 2 diabetes.
 * Reduce risk of several forms of cancer.
 * Reduce arthritis pain and associated disability.
 * Reduce risk of osteoporosis and falls.
 * Reduce symptoms of depression and anxiety.

In addition, physical activity is important if you are trying to lose weight or maintain a healthy weight. More physical activity increases the number of calories your body uses for energy. Using calories through physical activity, combined with reducing the calories you eat, creates a calorie deficit that results in weight loss.

Most weight loss occurs from decreasing calories. However, the only way to maintain weight loss is to engage in regular physical activity.


How much physical activity do I need?

For overall health, adults need at least 150 minutes a week of moderate-intensity aerobic activity. This could be brisk walking 22 minutes a day; 30 minutes a day, 5 days a week; or what works for your schedule. Alternatively, you could do 75 minutes of vigorous-intensity aerobic activity each week, such as swimming laps. Or you could do an equivalent combination of moderate- and vigorous-intensity aerobic activity each week. Adults also need at least 2 days a week of muscle-strengthening activity. See recommendations for different groups.

You may need more than the recommended minutes of physical activity a week to maintain your weight. The exact amount of physical activity needed to maintain a healthy weight varies greatly from person to person.

To lose weight and keep it off, you will need a high amount of physical activity unless you also adjust your diet to reduce the number of calories you eat and drink. Getting to and staying at a healthy weight requires both regular physical activity and healthy eating patterns.


What do moderate- and vigorous-intensity mean?

With moderate-intensity physical activity, breathing and heart rate are noticeably faster, but you can still carry on a conversation.

Examples include:

 * Walking briskly (a 15-minute mile).
 * Light yard work (raking/bagging leaves or pushing a lawn mower).
 * Light snow shoveling.
 * Actively playing with children.
 * Biking at a casual pace.

With vigorous-intensity physical activity, your heart rate increases substantially. You are breathing too hard to have a conversation.

Examples include:

 * Jogging/running.
 * Swimming laps.
 * Rollerblading/inline skating at a brisk pace.
 * Cross-country skiing.
 * Most competitive sports (football, basketball, and soccer).
 * Jumping rope.


How many calories are used in typical activities?

The following tables show calories used in common physical activities at both moderate and vigorous levels.

Light gardening/yard work

Golf (walking and carrying clubs)

Weight lifting (general light workout)

Swimming (slow freestyle laps)

Heavy yard work (chopping wood)

Weight lifting (vigorous effort)

1 Calories burned will be higher for persons who weigh more than 154 lbs (70 kg) and lower for people who weigh less. Adapted from Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2005, page 16, Table


10 TIPS FOR MAINTAINING A HEALTHY
LIFESTYLE AND BODY WEIGHTYiqing Song, Professor of Epidemiology, Department of Epidemiology, Fairbanks School of Public Health
At this extreme moment, we began working from home, away from campus, and keeping social distance for as many
people as possible. As we stay home and are stuck with the foods that have been in our fridge or pantry for a while,
we are temporarily living a sedentary lifestyle with increased odds of physical inactivity, excessive eating and sitting,
stress, anxiety, and depression. In particular, many of us will gain some weight during the pandemic and may keep the
extra weight permanently, which may carry considerable health risks for type 2 diabetes, hypertension, heart attack,
stroke, and other health problems.
Here, I’d like to share some basic tips and resources for how to maintain your healthy lifestyle, body weight, and
overall well-being while staying home and engaging in social distancing.
1. Measure and Watch Your Weight
Keeping track of your body weight on a daily or weekly basis will help you see what you’re losing and/or what
you’re gaining.
2. Limit Unhealthy Foods and Eat Healthy Meals
Do not forget to eat breakfast and choose a nutritious meal with more protein and fiber and less fat, sugar, and
calories. For more information on weight-control foods and dietary recommendations, please check the following
website: www.hsph.harvard.edu/obesity-prevention-source/obesity-causes/diet-and-weight/.
3. Take Multivitamin Supplements
To make sure you have sufficient levels of nutrients, taking a daily multivitamin supplement is a good idea,
especially when you do not have a variety of vegetables and fruits at home. Many micronutrients are vital to your
immune system, including vitamins A, B6, B12, C, D, and E, as well as zinc, iron, copper, selenium, and magnesium.
However, there’s currently NO available evidence that adding any supplements or “miracle mineral supplements”
to your diet will help protect you from the virus or increase recovery. In some cases, high doses of vitamins can be
bad for your health.
4. Drink Water and Stay Hydrated, and Limit Sugared Beverages
Drink water regularly to stay healthy, but there is NO evidence that drinking water frequently (e.g. every 15
minutes) can help prevent any viral infection. For more information on drinking water and coronavirus, please
check the following EPA website: www.epa.gov/coronavirus/coronavirus-and-drinking-water-and-wastewater.
1050 Wishard Boulevard | Indianapolis, IN 46202
(317) 274-2000 | fsphinfo@iupui.edu | fsph.iupui.edu
1050 Wishard Boulevard | Indianapolis, IN 46202
(317) 274-2000 | fsphinfo@iupui.edu | fsph.iupui.edu
5. Exercise Regularly and Be Physically Active
At this time, at-home workouts may be a good idea. But you can also walk your dog or run outside. Be sure you
know what’s going on in your area and if there are any restrictions or mandatory self-quarantines. For more
information on how to stay physically active while at home, please check the ACSM website: www.acsm.org/
read-research/newsroom/news-releases/news-detail/2020/03/16/staying-physically-active-during-covid-19-
pandemic.
6. Reduce Sitting and Screen Time
Exercise can’t immunize you from your sedentary time. Even people who exercise regularly could be at increased
risk for diabetes and heart disease and stroke if they spend lots of time sitting behind computers. Practically
speaking, you could consider taking breaks from sedentary time, such as walking around the office/room a couple
of times in a day.
7. Get Enough Good Sleep
There is a very strong connection between sleep quality and quantity and your immune system. You can keep your
immune system functioning properly by getting seven to eight hours of sleep each night. For more information,
please check the CDC website: www.cdc.gov/sleep/index.html.
8. Go Easy on Alcohol and Stay Sober
Drinking alcohol does not protect you from the coronavirus infection. Don’t forget that those alcohol calories can
add up quickly. Alcohol should always be consumed in moderation. Please see the recommendations by the AHA:
www.heart.org/en/healthy-living/healthy-eating/eat-smart/nutrition-basics/alcohol-and-heart-health.
9. Find Ways to Manage Your Emotions
It is common for people to have feelings of fear, anxiety, sadness, and uncertainty during a pandemic. To minimize
stress-related weight gain, you use this information about stress and coping provided by the CDC: www.cdc.gov/
coronavirus/2019-ncov/prepare/managing-stress-anxiety.html.
10. Use an App to Keep Track of Your Movement, Sleep, and Heart Rate
A reminder: People with serious chronic medical conditions, including extreme obesity, diabetes, and heart disease
are at a higher risk of experiencing complications and getting very sick from the COVID-19 infection. They should talk
to their medical providers and listen to their advice.

How to Maintain a Healthy Lifestyle: 12 Effective Tips

Exercising regularly, eating nourishing foods, and reducing your intake of sugar and alcohol are just some of the recommendations for maintaining a healthy lifestyle.

Taking care of your health is arguably the most important thing you can do for yourself (and your loved ones).

Whether you make a point to eat more fruits and vegetables or get outside for a daily walk, there isn’t just one way to maintain a healthy lifestyle.

To center health and wellness in your life, try including some or all of the 12 tips we include in this article. Adopting just a few of these recommendations can go a long way to improving your physical and mental well-being.

Maintain a healthy weight for you

Keeping your weight in a healthy range can protect you from things like high blood pressure, high cholesterol, heart disease, stroke, and type 2 diabetes.

Remember, weight isn’t just about a number on the scale. Everyone is different, so it’s best to work with a doctor to determine a healthy weight for you.

Eat nourishing foods

Our bodies need a variety of foods to give us energy and keep them running. That means eating a balanced diet that contains vitamins, minerals, and fiber, which can be found in fruits and vegetables (with a focus on leafy greens), whole grains, legumes, nuts, lean protein, and low fat dairy, per the NIDDK.

Of course, it’s OK to have a treat once in a while, but it’s best if the bulk of your everyday meals and snacks contain some of those vital nutrients.

Limit processed foods and sugar

It’s best to eat mostly nutrient-dense foods. This means limiting highly processed foods, like packaged and frozen foods, that typically have fewer nutrients but more calories, fat, salt, and added sugars. You should also limit your intake of soda, packaged cookies and chips, candy, and sweetened cereals.

If you’re having a hard time giving up packaged snacks or fast food, you can try slowly swapping out these processed meals and snacks for whole foods. It’s not a perfect science, and setbacks are a normal part of making big changes in your life.

Drink water and stay hydrated

Staying hydrated isn’t just about quenching your thirst, it also keeps your body and brain running. Not only can drinking enough water improve your thinking abilities but may also help:

 * improve digestion
 * increase your energy
 * decrease joint pain
 * improve your heart health

Advice on how much water to drink per day varies, but anywhere between 8 and 13 cups a day is a good target.

Exercise regularly

 * boosting your mood
 * giving you more energy
 * building muscle
 * protecting your bones
 * losing or maintaining weight
 * helping you get better sleep

Regular exercise can also help prevent chronic conditions like heart disease, type 2 diabetes, and some types of cancer.

Reduce sitting and screen time

Prolonged sitting and sedentary behavior have been linked to an increased chance of heart disease, weight gain, and early death. However, regular exercise doesn’t completely balance these effects. So, it’s a good idea to get your workouts in and take breaks from sitting throughout the day. Plus, cutting down your screen time won’t hurt either.

Get outdoors daily

Being out in nature has a way of putting things in perspective, but it also has proven benefits for your mental health. Not only can soaking up the sun ease symptoms of depression, but it can make you feel more relaxed and focused, particularly when you take notice of your surroundings.

Getting outside can also ease feelings like worry and sadness and promote happiness, optimism, and a sense of connection with the world. Sunlight is also the best source of vitamin D.

Get plenty of sleep

We all know sleep is important, but getting good sleep is really critical to your overall health. When you sleep, your body is actually completing a number of essential tasks, like:

 * maintaining bodily functions
 * repairing muscle tissue
 * restoring energy
 * processing new memories and information in the brain

When you don’t get enough sleep, you may be irritable, emotional, and have trouble focusing. If sleep deprivation becomes chronic, it can even increase the chance of cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes, and depression.

For all of these reasons, it’s important for most adults to get between 7 and 9 hours of sleep every night.

Go easy on the alcohol

Having a drink now and then is perfectly fine, but make sure to limit alcohol to no more than one drink per day for women and one to two drinks per day for men, according to the Department of Agriculture Dietary Guidelines.

Having more than that could have a negative effect on your health. In case you’re curious, one drink is typically defined as 12 ounces of beer, 5 ounces of wine, or 1.5 ounces of hard liquor such as gin or vodka.

There are a few studies that suggest some alcohol could have health benefits, according to Harvard’s School of Public Health. However, more recent research suggests no amount of alcohol is really “safe” to consume.” If you do drink, it’s best to do so in moderation.

Quit smoking (if you smoke)

Smoking releases harmful chemicals into your body and can damage lung tissue, heart health, and more. It’s no surprise that smoking is also the number one risk factor for lung cancer.

That’s why quitting smoking is one of the most important things you can do for your health, no matter your age or how long you’ve smoked. In fact, quitting smoking can add up to 10 years to your life expectancy, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

Knowing it’s best for your health to quit smoking is one thing, but actually doing it can be quite hard. The good news is there are lots of resources and medications that can help.

Consider taking a multivitamin supplement

Multivitamins may be an important part of your routine, particularly if you have a nutritional deficiency due to:

 * older age
 * pregnancy
 * malabsorption issues
 * certain medications

Outside of that, research is still mixed on whether multivitamins are effective at improving health, according to Harvard’s School of Public Health. That said, taking a daily multivitamin within the recommended daily allowance likely won’t harm you either.

Stay on top of health screenings and check-ups

When life gets busy, annual physicals and bi-yearly dental cleanings may fall by the wayside, but these check-ups are important to stay on top of your health, according to the CDC.

It’s also important to attend health screenings that you are due for — such as a breast mammogram or a colonoscopy. These can detect disease early, making it easier to treat. Keeping up to date with your vaccinations can also help prevent certain infections or diseases.

Regardless, scheduling regular checkups with a doctor and dentist is one great way to maintain a healthy lifestyle.

Takeaway

Paying attention to your lifestyle and daily habits is the first step to making changes that can benefit your health in the long run. Think of these tips as a jumping-off point to maintain a healthy lifestyle and live your best life possible for as long as possible.
14 tips and habits to help you create your healthiest lifestyle

Explore different types of habits and how good habits can help you be healthy. Plus, tips and habits to help anyone create their healthiest lifestyle.

Most of us aspire to lead a healthy life, but the path to achieving it can seem daunting. By integrating a few effective, manageable habits into your daily routine, you can make significant strides toward your healthiest lifestyle. Explore the benefits of a healthy lifestyle and types of habits to get started on living healthily.


What is a healthy lifestyle?

A healthy lifestyle is about feeling strong, energetic, and happy. It's where you wake up feeling good, with the energy to do the things you love. Your version of a healthy lifestyle is personal to you. Look for the balance that makes you feel your best, inside and out.


Why is a healthy lifestyle important?

 1. Physical health: Eating well and exercising regularly can help prevent many illnesses, including heart disease and diabetes.

 2. Mental health: A healthy lifestyle includes taking care of your mind. Regular exercise, good nutrition, and sufficient sleep can greatly improve your mood and reduce stress and anxiety.

 3. Longevity: Research has shown that healthy habits can add years to your life. But it’s also important to live those extra years with a better quality of life.

 4. Energy and vitality: Good nutrition and exercise help you feel more energetic. This means you can play with your kids, go on adventures, and tackle your daily tasks with more enthusiasm.

 5. Emotional wellbeing: Physical health benefits can influence your emotional health. When you feel good physically, you're likely to have a more positive outlook on life.


7 healthy habits to incorporate into your life

Creating a healthiest lifestyle involves building habits that positively impact your physical and mental wellbeing. Start by incorporating one or two habits into your daily routine and grow toward your healthiest lifestyle from there.


1. Drink plenty of water

Stay hydrated. Drinking enough water is essential for your body's functions like digestion, temperature regulation, and joint health.


2. Eat nourishing foods

Explore the benefits of mindful eating by choosing foods that fuel your body and mind. Include a variety of fruits, vegetables, whole grains, lean proteins, and healthy fats in your diet. Planning your meals can help you make healthier choices and avoid last-minute, less nutritious options.


3. Exercise regularly

Regular exercise strengthens your heart, boosts your mood, and increases energy levels. Find activities you enjoy and aim for at least 30 minutes of moderate activity most days of the week.


4. Get good sleep

Prioritize your sleep. Aim for 7–9 hours of quality sleep each night to help your body repair itself and your brain process information from the day.


5. Spend time outdoors

Connect with nature—it can improve your mood, increase your vitamin D levels, and help you feel more relaxed and grounded. Even a short walk in a park can make a difference.


6. Make time to play and explore

Channel your inner child and engage in activities you loved when you were younger while exploring new activities you’ve always wanted to try. Make time to enjoy hobbies, try new activities, or simply play to help boost your creativity and reduce stress.


7. Practice mindfulness and meditation

Mindfulness and meditation can help reduce stress, improve focus, and contribute to emotional stability. Start with a few minutes each day and gradually increase the time you spend meditating, and notice how opening the door to a regular mindfulness practice boosts your health and happiness.


The different types of habits

Leading a healthy lifestyle means creating a balance of different types of habits that contribute to your overall wellbeing to establish a well-rounded, healthy lifestyle.


Social habits

Socializing is essential and can lead to a sense of belonging and support, which is vital for your emotional health and mental wellbeing. Create comfortable relationships and connect with others by spending time with family and friends, joining a club, or participating in community events.


Emotional habits

Emotional habits can include journaling, talking to a friend, or seeking professional support to help you understand and manage your feelings. Create a foundation for emotional resilience and stability by acknowledging and addressing your emotions.


Health habits

Health habits are those most often associated with a healthy lifestyle. They can include eating nutritious foods, staying physically active, getting enough sleep, and practicing stress-reducing activities like meditation or yoga. Health habits can help maintain a stronger, healthier body and better mental health.


Productivity habits

Productivity habits help you accomplish your goals without unnecessary stress. This could involve organizing your space, setting clear goals, or breaking tasks into smaller steps. By being productive, you make the best use of your time and energy, leaving more room for relaxation and enjoyment.


Spiritual habits

Regardless of religious beliefs, spiritual habits can include meditation, spending time in nature, or engaging in activities that give you a sense of peace and purpose. These practices can help you feel connected to something greater than yourself and provide a sense of calm and clarity in your life.


The impacts of having a healthy lifestyle

Adopting a healthy lifestyle can be one of the most beneficial decisions you make for yourself. It can positively influence every aspect of your life.


Boosts physical health

A healthy lifestyle can significantly reduce the risk of chronic diseases such as heart disease, diabetes, and some types of cancer. Regular physical activity and a range of nutritious foods can strengthen your heart, bones, and muscles, and help the body remain strong. Your body can heal quicker and resist illness better.


Enhances mental wellbeing

Healthy habits like exercise, adequate sleep, and balanced nutrition are crucial for mental health. Physical activity sometimes releases feel-good hormones, which can enhance mood and reduce feelings of depression and anxiety. A good night's sleep can improve cognitive functions like memory and concentration, while a nutritious diet can positively impact brain health.


Improves emotional stability

Regular exercise, healthy eating and sufficient rest can lead to improved self-esteem and a more balanced emotional state, so you can handle stress and emotional challenges more easily.


Encourages long-term wellness

Living a healthy lifestyle helps you remain active, energetic, and capable of enjoying a longer life to its fullest.


Helps build better relationships

When you feel good physically and mentally, you have more energy to invest in your family, friends, and community, leading to stronger, more meaningful connections.


How to be healthy: 7 tips to get started

By following these tips toward a healthier lifestyle, you're setting the foundation for a happier, more fulfilling life. The journey to health is personal and unique to you, so embrace it at your own pace and in your own way.


1. Start small and progress gradually

Begin with manageable goals. If you're new to exercising, start with short walks and gradually increase the duration. If you’re trying to eat healthier, try adding one serving of fruit or vegetables to your meals each day instead of depriving yourself of foods you enjoy.

💙 Discover The ‘Why’ Behind Your Goals to help you gain clarity and stay motivated on your journey to a healthier life.


2. Track your progress

Keep a record of your journey. Use a journal, app, or simple checklist to track your daily activities, and how you're feeling. Seeing your progress over time can be a great motivator and can help you identify what's working well and what might need adjustment.


3. Be patient and kind to yourself

Understand that change takes time. It's normal to have days where you don't go for a walk and you rest instead, or you enjoy a slice of cake at a celebration.

💙 Explore Self-Affirmations as a way to send love to yourself on your journey to a healthier lifestyle, whatever that means for you.


4. Educate yourself

Read books, watch informative videos, or browse reliable websites to understand the basics of nutrition, exercise, and mental wellbeing. Understanding the why behind healthy living can make healthy habits easier to adopt.

💙 Learn about The 4 Pillars of Health with Dr. Rangan Chatterjee so you can start living a healthier life today.


Calm your mind. Change your life.

Mental health is hard. Getting support doesn't have to be. The Calm app puts the tools to feel better in your back pocket, with personalized content to manage stress and anxiety, get better sleep, and feel more present in your life.

